In this video, we'll go over some
examples of using c-style strings.
First thing you'll notice
is I'm including cstring.
I need to include that header file
for the c-style string functions.
And I'm also including cctype
that's because I'm going to
use some of the character-based
functions in this example.
Okay, so I'm using namespace
standard, and I've declared four
c-style string variables, which are
really just arrays of characters.
On lines 9 through 12, first name,
last name, full name and temp.
And I've made them to be
pretty big: 20, 20, 50 and 50.
That should allow us to put stuff in
there without exceeding the bounds.
Okay, so the first thing
we'll do is notice here
first name is uninitialized.
They're actually all uninitialized.
Let's display first name.
This is a real problem because
we've never initialized that array.
So it's very likely we're
going to get garbage.
So let's run this.
And by the way, I'm in the
section 10 workspace in the
c-style strings project.
So let me run this.
And there you can see the
garbage right up here
and see it right in there.
What displays is who knows, right.
Whatever characters happen
to be in those locations.
You might get lucky, and the
null character might be in
the first location in which
case nothing will print.
But more often than not
you'll get garbage like this.
And this is a real common sin.
And whether you're displaying to
the console or inside a window in
Microsoft windows or x window, and you
see something that displays like that
on a button or up here on a title
bar or something, that's a classic
symptom of uninitialized string.
Let me comment that out.
We don't want uninitialized strings.
Now obviously, we'd want to
initialize these guys just like
that or to a string if we want.
So let me just go ahead and
initialize all of them, which
is really the best practice.
Okay, so now they're all initialized.
So the first thing we'll do is
I'll uncomment these lines here.
And this is nothing
we haven't seen before. Pretty
straightforward, right.
Enter your first name and we're
using the extraction operator to read
our first name into that variable
first name, which is the array.
So whatever I type in, I'm just going
to use my name in these examples.
Frank will be stored into first name.
It'll be f-r-a-n-k, and then the
null character will automatically
be put in there for us.
Same thing with last name.
Okay, so again, nothing
we haven't seen before.
Now here, let's talk
about these two lines.
In this case, let me grab
my marker real quick.
In this case, we're
saying hello first name.
Now this will be replaced
with the value of first name.
What's the value of first name.
Well, at this point i
have Frank in there.
And remember, this is 20 big here.
But in this case, let's just say I've
got that that's the null character.
So how do we determine
the value of first name.
Well, we start here.
Do we see a null, no.
We move over.
And we keep going
until we see that null.
At that point, that's what's returned.
So this will display Frank.
That's really what's going
on when we're displaying
these c-style variables.
So it's going to say hello
Frank your first name has.
And then we see this function
right here the strlen or
the string length function.
A function is nothing more
than a request for somebody
else to do something for you.
And we'll write functions really
soon i think in the next section.
So in this case, I'm calling the
strlen function I'm passing in
that array of characters Frank.
So what's it going to do? It's
going to do the same thing
we just did here, right.
Let me clean this up a little bit,
and we'll walk through this again.
So in this case, how does
the string length determine
the length of that name.
Well, you start here.
Is that a null, no.
That's one.
That's two.
How about this guy, nope.
That's three.
The n, nope.
The k, that's five.
Now we see the null.
The length is five.
That's what's being returned here.
Now strlen doesn't return an integer.
It doesn't really return
an unsigned integer.
It returns a type called size t.
And I haven't talked about
that yet but I'm going to now.
Size t really is an unsigned integer.
It could be an unsigned long.
You really don't know what
it is based on your system,
that's the whole point.
We really should be using size
t because regardless of what
system you're on, this will work.
You can be sure it will
be unsigned though, right.
Because it doesn't make sense to
have negative sizes for strings or
negative sizes for loop variables
and things like that typically.
So from this point forward,
I'm going to start using
size t where appropriate
rather than enter unsigned.
It's the more correct way of doing it.
Okay, so that'll return 5.
So this will display hello Frank
your first name has five characters.
And your last name, same idea.
It'll print out my last name here.
And my last name has 11 characters,
so it should display 11 characters.
Okay, so let's run this example.
My first name is Frank, and I'll
put in my last name Mitropoulos.
And it says hello Frank your
first name has five characters and
your last name Mitropoulos has 11
characters, exactly what we expect.
Now everything I'm talking
about in this video is totally
dependent on that guy right there.
If for whatever reason those
null characters or that null
character is not there, you can
imagine, right, we're going to
keep counting until we hit one
which way maybe you know a 1000
characters down the line in memory.
Typically, you don't have to
worry about it when you use
these functions, strlen, cin,
strcat, like we see down here.
They handle that for you.
But if you're working with
strings on your own and you're
processing characters and moving
characters around, you've got
to be aware that you need to
null terminate your strings.
Otherwise, you're going
to run into problems.
All right, let me clear
this up real quick.
And let's do another
example down here.
I'll uncomment this piece of code out
and we'll talk about that real quick.
So what do we have now.
Well, we have Frank
in first name, right.
So first name is Frank.
I just typed it in.
And I'll type it in again
in the next example.
What we're doing here is we're copying
using the string copy function.
We're copying first name to full name.
This is the way it works.
It's going from this right
argument to the left one,
not the other way around.
This is confusing
sometimes for students.
So I'm copying first
name into full name.
So again, here was first name.
And it had Frank in it.
And over here is full name.
Again, this is first name,
and this is full name.
How does it copy.
Well, one character at a
time it's going to copy the
F the R the A the N the K.
And it's going to keep copying
until it hits that null character.
At that point, it copies the
null character and it stops.
Okay, so at this point full
name will have Frank followed
by the null character.
The strcat function is
the concatenate function.
In this case what I'm doing
is I'm adding a space.
You can see the space right
there in double quotes.
I'm adding the space to full name.
So now it's putting a
space here, right in there.
And then it's putting
the null character.
So at this point, that's going
to be Frank followed by a space.
I'll just use that underscore
to denote the space.
Then I'm doing another string cat.
And what I'm doing now
is I'm concatenating.
Again, this goes this way.
I'm concatenating the
last name to a full name.
So now I'm putting
in my last name here.
And it will also put in the
null character at the end.
And then I'm just displaying it.
Okay, so notice what we're doing here.
What we're doing is we're
basically building up full name
from first name and last name
using strcat or string cat.
Let's run this.
And what I'll do here is I'll
say again my first name is Frank
and my last name is Mitropoulos.
Hello Frank all that's the same.
And then it says here your
full name is Frank Mitropoulos.
Notice how it concatenated the Frank
the space and the Mitropoulos into one.
So full name now contains that string.
Okay, so let's do another example.
I'm going to comment all of this
out so we're fresh every time.
And in this example, here this
is an example that shows you
one of the behaviors of the
cin extraction operator here.
What I'm doing here is I'm
prompting the user me this case
for my full name and I'm going
to enter the full name and I'm
going to display the full name.
Okay, so let me run that.
And I'm just going to say my
full name is Frank Mitropoulos.
But now when I try to display my
full name, notice I only get Frank.
That's the normal behavior
for that extraction operator.
It's read again f-r-a-n-k space
that's a whitespace, so it stops.
That's it.
Okay, sometimes you want to
be able to read the entire
name, right, the whole line.
So this is what we'll do in
these next few lines here.
In this case, again, I'm
prompting enter your full name.
But now I'm using
cin's getline function.
This works again with c-style strings.
So in this case, I'm providing
the name of that c-style
string, that array name here
is full name and a limit.
This is how many characters
maximum you're going to read.
So I'm saying cin getline.
So this will stop either at
50 if you reach the max or
when the user presses enter.
So in this case, it's going
to read the whole name, right.
So let me run that again.
And I'll say Frank Mitropoulos
again and press enter. You can
see that the full name now is
the first name and the last name.
So it's reading the entire line.
Now let me do a couple
of more examples.
Let's do a comparison example here.
In this case, remember,
full name will have my full
name in it Frank Mitropoulos.
And when I'm doing that
I'm copying that to temp.
Temp if you recall, I'll
scroll up real quick.
Temp is another array of characters,
pretty big and that's 50 size.
So my name will
definitely fit in there.
And when I say big size,
my name will fit in there.
That's one of the things you always
have to worry about when you're
working with c-style strings.
You've always got to be sure
that you've got enough storage.
If you don't have enough storage,
you're going to have a problem
because you're going to run over
the bounds and probably clobber some
other memory location with something.
Okay, so again, let's assume that
I've typed in my name and now I'm
going to copy my name to temp.
Then I want to compare those two.
They should be the same,
right because I just copied
it to another variable name.
Well, we can use the
string compare function.
We pass in the two strings
that we want to compare, in
this case, temp and full name.
And if we get back a 0 that
means that they're the same.
If we don't get back a 0, that
means they're not the same.
So in this example, I
expect to get back a 0.
So let me run this real quick,
and I'll type in my full name.
They are the same Frank Mitropoulos
and Frank Mitropoulos are the same
because it's the same string.
So I did get back to 0.
Okay, so now let's modify that string
and then we'll compare it again.
So what we'll do this time
we'll use a for loop, and I'll
uncomment this code out real quick.
And you'll notice what we're doing
we're going from I equals 0 and notice
I'm using size t here instead of into
or unsigned, this is the better way to
do it, the more correct way to do it.
So I'm going from I equals
0, while I is less than the
string length of the full name.
Again, string length is
going to return however many
characters are in there.
I want to be sure I'm going less
than that because remember we're
going from 0 to the size minus one.
And I'm incrementing
I by one each time.
Then I'm using one of
the character functions.
I'm saying full name sub I.
That's the specific character, right.
So it's going to be f
r a n k and so forth.
If it's an alpha
character, right, a letter.
Then I'm going to convert that
letter to uppercase and put
it right back where it was.
So now my name will
be all capitalized.
Okay, so let's run that.
And I'll type in my name with
mixed upper and lowercase.
You can see here that it compared
them and they're the same.
And now my name is all uppercase
because I used the two upper function.
So now let's compare those two now.
Obviously, they're not the
same, right because I just made
one a little bit different.
So let's do this.
Let's comment all of this
out and walk through it.
And so what's going on here.
I'm comparing temp and full name.
They're not the same anymore, right.
Full name is now all
uppercase and temp is not.
So I'm going to compare them,
and it's going to say are they
the same are they different.
Now that I expect this to be different
because this will not be equal to 0.
So what - how does this work with the 0.
Well, if the two strings are
the same and that's character by
character lexically, the string
compare function will return a 0.
Otherwise, it'll return a
negative number or a positive
number depending on which of
the string is larger, right.
So in this case, I'm comparing them
temp and full name and then full name
and temp so you can see the result.
So let's run this.
So again, I'll use my
name and press enter.
So as you can see, the two
strings are now different.
And the string compare
function will return 0 if
the two strings are the same.
You can see here that we're
comparing two different strings.
It returns less than 0 if the first
string lexically comes before the
second string or return greater
than 0 if the first string lexically
comes after the second string.
Okay, so that completes this video.
This gives you a little bit of
insight as how to use c-style
strings and their functions.
What we'll do next is we'll
talk about c++ strings.